 # Birds from Yucatán Peninsula 
 
## __FACTORS THAT COULD HAVE INFLUENCED THE CHANGE IN BODY SIZE OF SOME BIRDS FROM THE YUCATÁN PENINSULA SINCE LATE PLEISTOCENE__

Ana Frida Silva-Martínez1, 2, J. Jaime Zúñiga-Vega 3, Joaquín Arroyo-Cabrales4, and Luis A. Sánchez González2, 5

1 Posgrado en Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, 04510, México.

2 Museo de Zoología “Alfonso L. Herrera”, Departamento de Biología Evolutiva, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, 04510, México.

3 Departamento de Ecología y Recursos Naturales, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, 04510, México.

4 Laboratorio de Arqueozoología “M. en C. Ticul Álvarez Solórzano”, Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia, Col. Centro, Ciudad de México, 06060, México.


__Abtract__

Current studies show that some bird species from the Yucatán Peninsula are smaller than their counterparts on continental places in Mexico. We start from the idea that the reduction in the geographic extension of the Yucatán Peninsula (from 457,650 km2 to 225,182 km2 after Last Glacial Maximum) likely modified the extension of different habitats throughout the peninsula, which may have also promoted changes in the body size of different taxa. Here, we show tendencies in body size of some bird species from Late Pleistocene to the Holocene and test whether the reduction of the geographic size of the Yucatán Peninsula may have influenced the changes in the body size of some bird species. Based on measurements of the tarsometatarsus, a reliable proxy for overall body size, we performed statistical analyses to test differences among and between fossil birds from the archaeological-paleontological site of Loltún cave and non-fossil specimens from the same region. Our results show significant differences in the body size of fossil and non-fossil birds. In turn, these results suggest that relatively recent ecological factors may have promoted body size variations.


